# Kubernetes Fury Distribution v1.25.6 to 1.26.0 Upgrade Guide

This guide describes the steps to follow to upgrade the Kubernetes Fury Distribution (KFD) from v1.25.6 to 1.26.0.

If you are running a custom set of modules, or different versions than the ones included with each release of KFD, please refer to each module's release notes.

Notice that the guide will not cover changes related to the cloud provider, ingresses or pod placement changes. Only changes related to KFD and its modules.

> ⛔️ **IMPORTANT**
> we strongly recommend reading the whole guide before starting the upgrade process to identify possible blockers.

## Upgrade procedure

### 1. Using furyctl

Change `.spec.distributionVersion` on your `furyctl.yaml` file with the new `v1.26.0`.

Validate the schema using the new `v0.26.0` `furyctl` version:

#### With EKSCluster provider

```bash
furyctl validate config
```

Delete the old ebs csi driver addon deployment and daemonset controllers with:

```bash
kubectl delete deployment ebs-csi-controller -n kube-system
kubectl delete daemonset ebs-csi-node -n kube-system
```

Apply the new configuration on the cluster:

```bash
furyctl create cluster
```

And in the last step, you need to manually rollout nodes on the ASGs.

#### With KFDDistribution provider

Update your cluster to 1.26 and next execute:

```bash
furyctl validate config
```

Apply the new configuration on the cluster with:

```bash
furyctl create cluster
```

### 2. Using KFD directly

As a high-level overview, the upgrade procedure consists on:

1. Upgrading KFD (all the core modules).
2. Upgrading the Kubernetes cluster itself.

The suggested approach to upgrade the distribution is to do it one module at a time, to reduce the risk of errors and to make the process more manageable.

#### Networking module upgrade

To upgrade the Networking module to the new version, update the version on the `Furyfile.yml` file to the new version:

```yaml
versions:
  networking: v1.14.0
...
```

Then, download the new modules with `furyctl` with the following command:

```bash
furyctl legacy vendor -H
```

Apply your Kustomize project that uses Networking module packages as bases with:

```bash
kustomize build <your-project-path/networking> | kubectl apply -f - --server-side
```

Wait until all Calico pods are restarted and running. You can check Calico's Grafana dashboard "General / Felix Dashboard (Calico)" and the "Networking / *" dashboards to make sure everything is working as expected.

#### Monitoring module upgrade

> ⚠️ **WARNING** downtime for the Monitoring stack is expected during this process.

To upgrade the Monitoring module to the new version, update the version on the `Furyfile.yml` file to the new version:

```yaml
versions:
...
  monitoring: v2.2.0
...
```

Then, download the new modules with `furyctl` with the following command:

```bash
furyctl legacy vendor -H
```

Then apply your Kustomize project that uses Monitoring module packages as bases with:

```bash
kustomize build <your-project-path/monitoring> | kubectl apply -f - --server-side
```

Wait a minute and check that you can see metrics in Grafana, both old and new, check that all Prometheus Targets are up and that Alertmanager is working as expected.

#### Logging module upgrade

> ⚠️ **WARNING** downtime of the Logging stack is expected during this process.

To upgrade the Logging module to the new version, update the version on the `Furyfile.yml` file to the new version:

```yaml
versions:
...
  logging: v3.2.0
...
```

Then, download the new modules with `furyctl` with the following command:

```bash
furyctl legacy vendor -H
```

Apply your Kustomize project that uses Logging module packages as bases with:

```bash
kustomize build <your-project-path/logging> | kubectl apply -f - --server-side
```

#### Ingress module upgrade

> ⚠️ **WARNING** some downtime of the NGINX Ingress Controller is expected during the upgrade process.

To upgrade the Ingress module to the new version, update the version on the `Furyfile.yml` file to the new version:

```yaml
versions:
...
  ingress: v2.1.0
...
```

Then, download the new modules with `furyctl` with the following command:

```bash
furyctl legacy vendor -H
```

Apply your Kustomize project that uses Ingress module packages as bases with:

```bash
kustomize build <your-project-path/ingress> | kubectl apply -f - --server-side
```

#### Disaster Recovery module upgrade

To upgrade the Disaster Recovery module to the new version, update the version on the `Furyfile.yml` file to the new version:

```yaml
versions:
...
  dr: v2.1.0
...
```

Then, download the new modules with `furyctl` with the following command:

```bash
furyctl legacy vendor -H
```

Apply your Kustomize project that uses Disaster Recovery module packages as bases with:

```bash
kustomize build <your-project-path/dr> | kubectl apply -f - --server-side
```

Check that all velero's pods are up and running, you may want to manually trigger a backup to test that everything is working as expected. For example:

```shell
# create a backup
velero backup create --from-schedule manifests test-upgrade -n kube-system
# ... wait a moment
# check that Phase is completed
velero get backup -n kube-system test-upgrade
# you may want to see some details
velero backup describe test-upgrade -n kube-system
```

> 💡 **TIP** you can use a port-forward minio'UI and login to check that the backups are there.

#### OPA module upgrade

To upgrade the OPA module to the new version, update the version on the `Furyfile.yml` file to the new version:

```yaml
versions:
...
  opa: v1.9.0
...
```

Then, download the new modules with `furyctl` with the following command:

```bash
furyctl legacy vendor -H
```

Apply your Kustomize project that uses OPA module packages as bases with:

```bash
kustomize build <your-project-path/opa> | kubectl apply -f - --server-side
```

You can try to deploy a pod that is not compliant with the rules deployed in the cluster and also check in Gatekeeper Policy Manager for new violations of the constraints.

#### Auth module upgrade

To upgrade the Auth module to the new version, update the version on the `Furyfile.yml` file to the new version:

If you were using these components, adjust your Kustomize project to use the new `auth` module as a base:

```yaml
versions:
...
  auth: v0.0.4
...
```

Then, download the new modules with `furyctl` with the following command:

```bash
furyctl legacy vendor -H
```

Apply your Kustomize project that uses Auth module packages as bases with:

```bash
kustomize build <your-project-path/auth> | kubectl apply -f - --server-side
```

🎉 **CONGRATULATIONS** you have now successfully updated all the core modules to KFD 1.26.0

### 2. Upgrade Kubernetes

Being that the underlying Kubernetes cluster could have been created in several different ways, the upgrade of Kubernetes itself is considered out of the scope of this guide.