# Kubernetes Fury Distribution v1.22.0 to 1.22.1 Upgrade Guide

This guide describes the steps to follow to upgrade the Kubernetes Fury Distribution (KFD) from v1.22.0 to v1.22.1

If you are running a custom set of modules, or different versions than the ones included with each release of KFD, please refer to each module's release notes.

Notice that the guide will not cover changes related to the cloud provider, ingresses or pod placement changes. Only changes related to KFD and its modules.

> ℹ️ **INFO**
> starting from 1.22.1, 1.23.3 and 1.24.0, due to the size of some resources, you will need to use the `--server-side` flag when performing `kubectl apply`. Server side apply behaves slighly different than client-side, please read [the official documentation first](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply).
<!-- separator -->
> ⛔️ **IMPORTANT**
> we strongly recommend reading the whole guide before starting the upgrade process to identify possible blockers.
<!-- separator -->
> ⚠️ **WARNING**
> the upgrade process involves downtime of some components.

## Upgrade procedure

As a high-level overview, the upgrade procedure consists on:

1. Upgrading KFD (all the core modules).
2. Upgrading the Kubernetes cluster itself.

### 1. Upgrade KFD

The suggested approach to upgrade the distribution is to do it one module at a time, to reduce the risk of errors and to make the process more manageable.

#### Networking module upgrade

To upgrade the Networking module to the new version, update the version on the `Furyfile.yml` file to the new version:

```yaml
versions:
  networking: v1.10.0
...
```

Then, download the new modules with `furyctl` with the following command:

```bash
furyctl vendor -H
```

Apply your Kustomize project that uses Networking module packages as bases with:

> ⛔️ **IMPORTANT** you may want to limit the scope of the command to only the networking module, otherwise, the first time you apply with `--server-side` other pods may also be restarted.
>
> The same applies to the rest of the modules, we will not include this warning in every step for simplicity.

```bash
kustomize build <your-project-path/monitoring-base> | kubectl apply -f - --server-side --force-conflicts
```

Wait until all Calico pods are restarted and running. You can check Calico's Grafana dashboard "General / Felix Dashboard (Calico)" and the "Networking / *" dashboards to make sure everything is working as expected.

#### Monitoring module upgrade

> ⚠️ **WARNING** downtime for the Monitoring stack is expected during this process.

To upgrade the Monitoring module to the new version, update the version on the `Furyfile.yml` file to the new version:

```yaml
versions:
...
  monitoring: v2.0.1
...
```

Then, download the new modules with `furyctl` with the following command:

```bash
furyctl vendor -H
```

This time, before applying the project, you need to do some manual steps on the existing resources:

Since the new release ships changes to some immutable fields, the upgrade process will involve the deletion and recreation of some resources.

```bash
# Prometheus Operator
kubectl delete deployments.apps prometheus-operator -n monitoring

# Prometheus Operated
kubectl delete poddisruptionbudgets.policy prometheus-k8s -n monitoring
kubectl delete clusterrolebinding.rbac.authorization.k8s.io prometheus-k8s-scrape
kubectl delete clusterroles.rbac.authorization.k8s.io prometheus-k8s-scrape
kubectl delete prometheusrules.monitoring.coreos.com prometheus-k8s-rules -n monitoring

# Alertmanager Operated
kubectl delete poddisruptionbudget.policy alertmanager-main -n monitoring

# Remove Goldpinger (deprecated)
kubectl delete servicemonitor.monitoring.coreos.com goldpinger -n monitoring
kubectl delete service goldpinger -n monitoring
kubectl delete daemonset.apps goldpinger -n monitoring
kubectl delete clusterrole.rbac.authorization.k8s.io goldpinger
kubectl delete serviceaccount goldpinger -n monitoring
kubectl delete rolebinding.rbac.authorization.k8s.io goldpinger:cluster:view -n monitoring
kubectl delete -n monitoring configmaps goldpinger-grafana-dashboard

# Grafana
kubectl delete deployments.apps grafana -n monitoring

# Kube Proxy Metrics
kubectl delete deployments.apps kube-state-metrics -n monitoring

# Remove Metrics Server (deprecated)
kubectl delete apiservice.apiregistration.k8s.io v1beta1.metrics.k8s.io
kubectl delete service metrics-server -n kube-system
kubectl delete deployment.apps metrics-server -n kube-system
kubectl delete clusterrolebinding.rbac.authorization.k8s.io metrics-server:system:auth-delegator
kubectl delete clusterrolebinding.rbac.authorization.k8s.io system:metrics-server
kubectl delete clusterrole.rbac.authorization.k8s.io system:aggregated-metrics-reader
kubectl delete clusterrole.rbac.authorization.k8s.io system:metrics-server
kubectl delete rolebinding.rbac.authorization.k8s.io metrics-server-auth-reader -n kube-system
kubectl delete serviceaccount metrics-server -n kube-system
kubectl delete certificate.cert-manager.io metrics-server-tls -n kube-system
kubectl delete certificate.cert-manager.io metrics-server-ca -n kube-system
kubectl delete issuer.cert-manager.io metrics-server-ca -n kube-system
kubectl delete issuer.cert-manager.io metrics-server-selfsign -n kube-system
kubectl delete secret metrics-server-ca metrics-server-tls -n kube-system
# Node Exporter
kubectl delete daemonsets.apps node-exporter -n monitoring

# x509 Exporter
kubectl delete serviceaccount x509-certificate-exporter-node -n monitoring
kubectl delete clusterrole.rbac.authorization.k8s.io x509-certificate-exporter-node
kubectl delete clusterrolebinding.rbac.authorization.k8s.io x509-certificate-exporter-node
kubectl delete daemonset.apps x509-certificate-exporter-nodes -n monitoring
```

Replace `metrics-server` with `prometheus-adapter` package as a base in your project, to replace the functionalities provided by `metrics-server`.

Delete `goldpinger` from your Kustomize resources.

Add `blackbox-exporter` to your Kustomize base.

Alertmanager configuration now expects 3 new secrets `infra-slack-webhook`, `k8s-slack-webhook` and `healthchecks-webhook` in the `monitoring` namespace with the endpoints where to send the alerts in the `url` key. We recommend you add them to your Kustomize base.

Example commands to create the secrets:

```shell
$ kubectl create secret generic infra-slack-webhook -n monitoring --from-literal url="<your endpoint URL, don't forget to include http(s):// >"
secret/infra-slack-webhook created

$ kubectl create secret generic healthchecks-webhook -n monitoring --from-literal url="<your endpoint URL, don't forget to include http(s):// >"
secret/healthchecks-webhook created

$ kubectl create secret generic k8s-slack-webhook -n monitoring --from-literal url="<your endpoint URL, don't forget to include http(s):// >"
secret/k8s-slack-webhook created
```

Then apply your Kustomize project that uses Monitoring module packages as bases with:

```bash
kustomize build <your-project-path> | kubectl apply -f - --server-side --force-conflicts
```

Wait a minute and check that you can see metrics in Grafana, both old and new, check that all Prometheus Targets are up and that Alertmanager is working as expected.

#### Logging module upgrade

> ℹ️ **INFO** the Logging module has gone under a big refactor, the ElasticSearch stack has been replaced with OpenSearch. Read carefully the instructions.
<!-- separator -->
> ⚠️ **WARNING** downtime of the Logging stack is expected during this process.

To upgrade the Logging module to the new version, update the version on the `Furyfile.yml` file to the new version:

```yaml
versions:
...
  logging: v3.0.1
...
```

Then, download the new modules with `furyctl` with the following command:

```bash
furyctl vendor -H
```

Since this upgrade changes the major version, there are some manual steps involving breaking changes that you need to do before applying the project:

Remove the old `fluentd` and `fluentbit` stack:

```bash
kubectl delete ds fluentbit -n logging
kubectl delete sts fluentd -n logging
```

Remove `fluentd`, `elasticsearch-single` (or `elasticsearch-triple`), `kibana` and `curator` from your Kustomize project and replace them with the `logging-operator`, `logging-operated`, `opensearch-single` or `opensearch-triple`, `opensearch-dashboards`, `configs` bases on your Kustomize project.

Apply your Kustomize project that uses Logging module packages as bases with:

```bash
kustomize build <your-project-path> | kubectl apply -f - --server-side --force-conflicts
```

> 💡 **TIP** you may need to apply twice or thrice because of the new CRDs need some time to be available.
<!-- spacer -->
> ℹ️ **INFO** index patterns may take a while to be created in OpenSearch Dashboards. There's a cronjob that runs every hour that creates them.

All the logs will now flow to the new OpenSearch stack.

> 💡 **TIP** don't forget create the ingress for OpenSearch Dashbaords (Kibana replacement).
>
> By default the service is called `opensearch-dashboards` in the `monitoring` namespace, and the web interface listens on the port `5601`.

You can leave the old Elasticsearch/Kibana stack running and remove it after you've verified that everything is working as expected and you don't need the data stored in ElasticSearch anymore. To do so, run the following commands:

```bash
kubectl delete statefulset elasticsearch -n logging
kubectl delete service elasticsearch -n logging
kubectl delete prometheusrule es-rules -n logging
kubectl delete servicemonitor elasticsearch -n logging
kubectl delete deployment kibana -n logging
kubectl delete service kibana -n logging
kubectl delete cronjob curator -n logging
```

> ℹ️ **INFO** you may need to delete additional resources created in your Kustomize base, `Ingress` objects for example.
<!-- spacer -->
> 💡 **TIP** we recommend leaving the ElasticSearch/Kibana stack up for a breif period (like 30 days) and then proceed to delete it.
>
> Beware that you'll need the necessary resources to have both solutions running simultaneously though.

#### Ingress module upgrade

> ⚠️ **WARNING** some downtime of the NGINX Ingress Controller is expected during the upgrade process.

To upgrade the Ingress module to the new version, update the version on the `Furyfile.yml` file to the new version:

```yaml
versions:
...
  ingress: v1.13.1
...
```

> 💡 **TIP1** `external-dns` [is now part if the Ingress module](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-ingress/tree/main/katalog/external-dns), you may want to switch to it if you were already using it.
<!-- separator -->
> 💡 **TIP2** if you are on AWS, we have added [2 new modules](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-ingress/tree/main/modules) to the Ingress modules to manage IAM permissions for cert-manager and external-dns.

Then, download the new modules with `furyctl` with the following command:

```bash
furyctl vendor -H
```

> ⛔️ **IMPORTANT** if you are using the **dual** NGINX Ingress Controller package, make sure that all your ingresses have the `.spec.ingressClass` field set and that they **don't have** the `kubernetes.io/ingress.class` annotation before proceeding.

cert-manager has been bumped several versions, please check the upgrade guides in the official documentation. In particular, the update from v1.7 to v1.8 includes some changes to the `spec.privateKey.rotationPolicy` field, read carefully if you were using it or you had the `--feature-gates=ServerSideApply=true` flag in the cert-manager controller.

Here you can find the relevant upgrade docs:

- <https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/upgrading/upgrading-1.6-1.7>
- <https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/upgrading/upgrading-1.7-1.8>
- <https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/upgrading/upgrading-1.8-1.9>
- <https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/upgrading/upgrading-1.9-1.10>

Apply your Kustomize project that uses Ingress module packages as bases with:

```bash
# For NGINX Ingress Controller SINGLE
kubectl delete ingressclass nginx -n ingress-nginx
# For NGINX Ingress Controller DUAL
kubectl delete ingressclass external internal -n ingress-nginx
# Delete cert-manager deployments to update labels
kubectl delete -n cert-manager deployments.apps cert-manager cert-manager-webhook cert-manager-cainjector
# finally
kustomize build <your-project-path> | kubectl apply -f - --server-side --force-conflicts
```

> ℹ️ **INFO** you may need to apply twice or thrice because a new Validating webhook is added with this release and it needs some time to come up.

#### Disaster Recovery module upgrade

To upgrade the Disaster Recovery module to the new version, update the version on the `Furyfile.yml` file to the new version:

```yaml
versions:
...
  dr: v1.10.0
...
```

Then, download the new modules with `furyctl` with the following command:

```bash
furyctl vendor -H
```

Apply your Kustomize project that uses Ingress module packages as bases with:

```bash
kustomize build <your-project-path> | kubectl apply -f - --server-side --force-conflicts
```

> ℹ️ **INFO** `velero-eks` has been deprecated, please use the new `aws-velero` terraform module instead in case you haven't migrated yet.

Check that all velero's pods are up and running, you may want to manually trigger a backup to test that everything is working as expected. For example:

```shell
# create a backup
velero backup create --from-schedule manifests test-upgrade -n kube-system
# ... wait a moment
# check that Phase is completed
velero get backup -n kube-system test-upgrade
# you may want to see some details
velero backup describe test-upgrade -n kube-system
```

> 💡 **TIP** you can use a port-forward minio'UI and login to check that the backups are there.

#### OPA module upgrade

To upgrade the OPA module to the new version, update the version on the `Furyfile.yml` file to the new version:

> ⚠️ **WARNING** the `http.send` OPA built-in is disabled. Check if there are custom rules using the built-in before proceeding. [Read here for more details](https://open-policy-agent.github.io/gatekeeper/website/docs/externaldata#motivation).

```yaml
versions:
...
  opa: v1.7.3
...
```

Then, download the new modules with `furyctl` with the following command:

```bash
furyctl vendor -H
```

Apply your Kustomize project that uses OPA module packages as bases with:

```bash
kustomize build <your-project-path> | kubectl apply -f - --server-side --force-conflicts
```

You can try to deploy a pod that is not compliant with the rules deployed in the cluster and also check in Gatekeeper Policy Manager for new violations of the constraints.

> ℹ️ **INFO** seeing errors like `http: TLS handshake error from 172.16.0.3:42672: EOF` in Gatekeeper Controller logs is normal. The error is considered harmless. See [Gatekeeper's issue #2142 for reference](https://github.com/open-policy-agent/gatekeeper/issues/2142).

#### Auth module upgrade

The Auth module is a new addition to KFD, there is no previous version to upgrade from, but, you could have been using Pomerium, Dex and Gangway which were previously included in the Ingress and on-premises modules respectively.

> ℹ️ **INFO** Pomerium's version has not changed and Dex has been updated for compatibility with Kubernetes 1.24.x, there are no breaking changes.

If you were using these components, adjust your Kustomize project to use the new `auth` module as a base:

```yaml
versions:
...
  auth: v0.0.2
...
```

Then, download the new modules with `furyctl` with the following command:

```bash
furyctl vendor -H
```

> 💡 **TIP** be sure to enable the `customHTMLTemplatesDir: /custom-templates` config option in Gangway's configuration to use the Fury branded templates.
> See the [example configuration file](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-auth/blob/33ac4818232a155ee3920cfabf1b3eb2a9720e7f/katalog/gangway/example/gangway.yml#L73).

Apply your Kustomize project that uses Auth module packages as bases with:

```bash
kustomize build <your-project-path> | kubectl apply -f - --server-side --force-conflicts
```

🎉 **CONGRATULATIONS** you have now successfully updated all the core modules to KFD 1.23.3

### 2. Upgrade Kubernetes

Being that the underlying Kubernetes cluster could have been created in several different ways, the upgrade of Kubernetes itself is considered out of the scope of this guide.

Please refer to the corresponding documentation for upgrade instructions.

For clusters created with Furyctl:

- [EKS Installer](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-eks-installer)
- [GKE Installer](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-gke-installer)
- [AKS Installer](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-aks-installer)

For clusters created with Fury on-premises:

- [KFD on-premises](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-on-premises/tree/main/examples/playbooks#upgrade-cluster)
