# SIGHUP Distribution Release v1.23.3

Welcome to SD release `v1.23.3`.

The distribution is maintained with â¤ï¸ by the team [SIGHUP](https://sighup.io/), and is battle tested in production environments.

This release adds a bunch of new features and improvements to the core modules, adds a new core module `auth` and some package replacement/removals.

## New Features since `v1.23.2`

### Core Module Updates

- [networking](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-networking) ðŸ“¦ core module: v1.9.0 -> [**v1.10.0**](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-networking/releases/tag/v1.10.0)
  - Updated calico from `3.23.2` to `3.24.1`.
  - Updated ip-masq-agent from `2.5.0` to `2.8.0`.
  - Added Tigera operator package.
- [monitoring](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-monitoring) ðŸ“¦ core module: v1.14.2 -> [**v2.0.1**](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-monitoring/releases/tag/v2.0.1)
  - Updated alertmanager from `0.23.0` to `0.24.0`.
  - Updated grafana from `8.3.3` to `8.5.5`.
  - Updated kube-rbac-proxy from `0.11.0` to `0.12.0`.
  - Updated kube-state-metrics from `2.3.0` to `2.5.0`.
  - Updated prometheus-operator from `0.53.1` to `0.57.0`.
  - Updated prometheus from `2.32.1` to `2.36.1`.
  - Updated x509-exporter from `2.12.1` to `3.2.0`.
  - Removed goldpinger package.
  - Removed metrics-server package.
  - Added blackbox-exporter package `0.21.0`.
  - Added prometheus-adapter package `0.9.1`.
- [logging](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-logging) ðŸ“¦ core module: v1.10.3 -> [**v3.0.1**](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-logging/releases/tag/v3.0.1)
  - Removed elasticsearch package.
  - Removed kibana package.
  - Removed fluentd package.
  - Removed curator package.
  - Added opensearch package `2.0.0`.
  - Added opensearch-dashboards package `2.0.0`.
  - Added logging-operator package `3.17.7`.
  - Added loki-stack as tech preview package `2.4.2`.
- [ingress](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-ingress) ðŸ“¦ core module: v1.12.2 -> [**v1.13.1**](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-ingress/releases/tag/v1.13.1)
  - Updated cert-manager from `1.6.1` to `1.10.0`.
  - Updated forecastle from `1.0.75` to `1.0.103`.
  - Removed nginx-ldap-auth package.
  - Removed nginx-ovh package.
  - Removed nginx-gke package.
  - Removed pomerium package.
  - Added external-dns package `0.10.2`.
  - Added aws-cert-manager terraform module.
  - Added aws-external-dns terraform module.
- [dr](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-dr) ðŸ“¦ core module: v1.9.2 -> [**v1.10.1**](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-dr/releases/tag/v1.10.1)
  - Updated velero from `1.7.1` to `1.9.2`.
  - Updated velero-plugin-for-aws from `1.3.0` to `1.5.1`.
  - Updated velero-plugin-for-microsoft-azure from `1.3.1` to `1.5.1`.
  - Updated velero-plugin-for-gcp from `1.3.0` to `1.5.1`.
  - Updated velero-plugin-for-csi from `0.2.0` to `0.3.1`.
- [OPA](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-opa) ðŸ“¦ core module: v1.6.2 -> [**v1.7.3**](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-opa/releases/tag/v1.7.3)
  - Updated gatekeeper from `3.7.0` to `3.9.2`.
  - Updated gatekeeper-policy-manager from `0.5.1` to `1.0.2`.
- [auth](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-auth) ðŸ“¦ core module: [**v0.0.2**](https://github.com/sighupio/fury-kubernetes-auth/releases/tag/v0.0.2)
  - Added pomerium package `0.15.8`.
  - Added dex package `2.35.3`.
  - Added gangway package `3.2.0`.
  
> Please refer the individual release notes for detailed information.

## Upgrade procedure

Check the [v1.23.2-to-v1.23.3 upgrade guide](../upgrades/v1.23.2-to-v1.23.3.md) for the detailed procedure.

## Breaking changes

Follow a summary of all the breaking changes introduced in this release, check each module for detailed information.

- Monitoring:
  - Removed goldpinger package, no replacement available.
  - Replaced metrics-server with prometheus-adapter.
  - `kubectl --server-side` apply is now required.
- Logging:
  - Removed elasticsearch and kibana packages, replaced by opensearch and opensearch-dashboards packages.
  - Removed self managed fluentd/fluentbit stack in favour of logging-operator.
- Ingress:
  - Removed support for annotations on NGINX ingress controller side.
  - Removed nginx-ldap-auth with no replacement available.
  - Moved pomerium to the new auth module.
  - Removed nginx-ovh and nginx-gke packages. The only thing they did was to patch the svc from the NGINX package to type `LoadBalancer`.
- Disaster Recovery:
  - Removed deprecated `eks-velero` in favour of `velero-plugin-for-aws`

## New features ðŸŒŸ

This release adds new features acrross all the core modules. Following is a list of the most interesting ones for each module.

- Networking
  - Added Tigera operator package, can be used to manage Calico (instead of installing it directly with calico package) or to enforce Network Policies on EKS-based clusters.

- Monitoring
  - Added blackbox-exporter package to monitor services external to the cluster.
  
- Logging
  - Introduced logging operator to manage all the logging stack and logging configs in a dynamic way.
  - Added Grafana Loki stack as tech preview.
  - Swtiched from ElasticSearch to OpenSearch.

- Ingress
  - Added ExternalDNS package to manage DNS records for services exposed through Ingress.
  - Added Terraform modules to manage IAM roles on AWS for cert-manager and external-dns.
  - Added Validating Webhook on NGINX ingress controller to validate the Ingress resources and prevent invalid configurations.
  - Forecastle now is Fury branded.

- Disaster Recovery
  - Added a Prometheus alert for when there are no successful backups in the last 24 hours for the included schedules.

- OPA
  - Major overhaul for Gatekeeper Policy Manager that is now released as a v1.0.2.
  - A set of custom Prometheus alerts that get triggered when the Gatekeeper webhooks are misbehaving for more than 5 min has been added.
  - Gatekeeper now has mutating capabilities in addition to just validating.

- Auth
  - Module was introduced as core module.
  - Pomerium, Dex and Gangway packages are available.
