# Kubernetes Fury Distribution Release v1.27.2

Welcome to KFD release `v1.27.2`.

The distribution is maintained with ❤️ by the team [SIGHUP](https://sighup.io/) it is battle tested in production environments.

## New Features since `v1.27.1`

This is a maintenance release enabling new features in furyctl automations. Changes include:

- Add: fields to manage the configuration on Kyverno and Gatekeeper to enable and disable the default included policies and also to change the enforcement mode on them (e.g. dryrun instad of deny).
- Add: use latest on-premises installer versions that includes new features for containerd (support for NVIDIA container toolkit and custom registries configurations).
- Add: field to opt-out from alertmanager's default configuration and use a custom one instead.
- Add: support for field migrations to trigger automatic reconfiguration of the distribution. The new supported fields of the configuration file are:
  - `.spec.distribution.modules.auth.provider.type`
  - `.spec.distribution.modules.dr.type`
  - `.spec.distribution.modules.dr.velero.backend`
  - `.spec.distribution.modules.ingress.nginx.type`
  - `.spec.distribution.modules.monitoring.type`
  - `.spec.distribution.modules.policy.gatekeeper.installDefaultPolicies`
  - `.spec.distribution.modules.policy.kyverno.installDefaultPolicies`
  - `.spec.distribution.modules.policy.type`
  - `.spec.distribution.modules.tracing.tempo.backend`
  - `.spec.distribution.modules.tracing.type`
- Enhancement: improved and added new end-to-end tests to cover migrations using the KFDDistribution kind.
- Enhancement: avoid errors when applying manifests due to Prometheus CRDs not being present when Monitorig type is none.
- Enhancement: don't warn the user and don't ask for confirmation when migrations are safe to apply.
- Fix: additional excluded namespaces option for Kyverno is now working as expected.

## Upgrade procedure

There are no changes of the included versions of the core modules.

Check the [upgrade docs](https://github.com/sighupio/furyctl/tree/main/docs/upgrades/kfd) for the detailed procedure.
